----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
PAPER: 42
TITLE: WCET analysis by Model Checking for a processor with dynamic branch prediction
AUTHORS: Armel Mangean, Jean-Luc Béchennec, Mikaël Briday and Sébastien Faucou

Overall evaluation: 2 (accept)

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
This paper shows how model-checking techniques can be used to evaluate
the worst-case execution time (WCET) of programs on a pipelined
processor with instruction cache, dynamic branch-prediction unit and
instruction prefetch buffer. 

This paper is very clearly written and presented. The authors rightly
argue at the crucial importance of determining WCET, particularly for
embedded systems, and how model-checking allows an exhaustive
evaluation of feasible execution paths.

The paper manages neatly to keep a good balance between hardware
architecture details and modeling choices. However, it would have been
nice to have more explicit definitions of the states (information
content) and transition of the model.

The experimental results shows that the authors' method is indeed
appropriate, even if one would had expected a bit more.

> One wonders, for instance, how the authors results compare to those
> that could be obtained either by simulation or by a worst-case
> static analysis.

Even if simulation cannot assure that all cases are covered, it could,
in practice, allows to essentially compute the same WCET bounds.
Similarly, static analysis could give an upper bound not that far from
the exact calculation done by the authors. Furthermore, in their
results, execution time is always very short. One wonders what the
main complexity factor is and why there is no case with longer running
time.

As more specific comments, on page 3, it would be good to explain, wrt
to fig 1, when exactly the branch is taken. Also, in relation to
program slicing p.4, it seems strange that the authors justify slicing
by scalability, when the execution time in the experimental section is
always very short.

In the bibliography wcet, mc, ilp have to be capitalized.

> Finally, it is surprising that the authors didn't make a better use
> of non-determinism, for instance in abstracting away details of the
> dynamic branch prediction algorithm.

Nevertheless, overall this is a very good paper that fits very well in
VECoS's topics.

